# ICR_CrucivirusEvolution
This project examines the use of alignment-free analyses in understanding the evolution of crucivirus.

We employed the following analyses:
1. Genome-sense prediction
We found the codon-ending preferences of each Capsid and Rep gene of our datasets. We compared the preferences of the Capsid and Rep gene of the same genome. If they have the same codon bias, the genome is unisense. Otherwise, it is ambisense. Horizontal gene transfers, which could possibily have occured between viruses and changed the composition of gene sequences of crucivirus, could have affected the sense of the crucivirus. Thus, by predicting the sense of each genome, we could observe a pattern of horizontal gene transfer. We showed the results on a table, composing of the name of the genome, the codon-ending bias of the CP gene, the codon bias of the Rep gene, and the sense of the genome. The accuracy of our program and the incorrect predictions allows us to find which genomes are incorrrectly predicted. Genetic strands that have coexisted in the same virus accumulate mutations at different speeds. Genetic strands that have been recently included into a virus due to genetic transfer do not have enough time to accumulate the mutations. This causes the recently acquired sequences to exhibit surprising orientations of genes. Out of all of the incorrect predictions, we identified genomes that have nnt percentages and nna percentages that are very different from each other, such as 0.05 apart, for capsid and/or rep genes. These genomes may have recent horizontal genetic transfers, which is a possible reason for why the orientation of the genes are unexpected. 
2. Pairwise comparison
We used pairwise analysis to compare the kmer composition in between crucivurs capsids and reps. We calculated the percentage of matching kmer sequences of differing lengths of all capsid genes with all capsid genes (including to themselves) and the same for rep genes. These data are visualized using heatmaps and dendrograms. The dendrograms give predictions of the relationship and evolution of capsid genes and rep genes in crucivirus. We can analyze the pattern of evolution of capsid and rep to determine if the two genes have coexisted in the same crucivirus for a long period of time.
3. Kmer sequence frequency analysis
We found all of the kmer sequences of a specific length for files recording CP and Rep genes of Cruci virus. We recorded the found kmer sequences and their frequency, or the number of times that they show up. Kmer sequences are a sequence of nucleotides of a certain length, often represented by 'k', with a codon being represented as a 3-mer sequence. We propose that genes that have existed in the same virus type for a long time may have the same pattern of kmer sequence frequencies. They may share kmer sequences of similar frequencies. We used both dotplots and scatterplots to find patterns between the frequencies of CP and Rep kmer sequences of Cruci virus. We can also compare the patterns of frequencies with other virus types, DNA and RNA, for predicting when the Cruci virus diverged from the other viruses in their evolutionary history.
4. Kmer rank for the similarity of CP and Rep genes
We proposed that the more similar two genes are, the higher the probability that they have been in the same virus for a long period of time, on the scale of evolution. In order to find the similarity between CP and Rep genes of each virus type, we compared each kmer sequence of CP gene with each kmer sequence of Rep gene with the same length. After we recheived the percentages for the similarity between CP and Rep are found for all genomes of each virus type, we made a ranking for each virus type. The ranking has the genome with the highest percentage of similarity between its CP and Rep genes on top and the genome with the lowest percentage on the bottom. Line graphs are used to visualize the rankings, with the percents of similarity between the two genes against the counts at which the percents are found in the genomes. We compiled the graphs for crucivirus, DNA, and RNA to see patterns among the three genome types.
Kmer sequences could be used to see horizontal genetic transfer between genomes. When comparing two genomes, kmer sequences that appear frequently in one genome and less frequently in the second genome often infer to a transfer of nucleotides from the first genome to the second. We want to see if there are horizontal genetic transfers between DNA and crucivirus and where the genetic transfers are located. We first created a heatmap showing the percentage of similar kmer sequences between each DNA genome and each crucivirus. We picked the genome pairs that have the least similarity and the most similarity to create charts visualizing the counts of every shared kmer sequences. We compared the charts of the most and least similar genomes to find patterns that distinguishes the most similar from the least. This gives confidence to if the kmer sequences that appeared at a very high count for the most similar genomes possibly are due to horizontal genetic transfers. The count of kmer sequences for the two genomes separately allows us to make predictions of the direction of the horizontal genetic transfer. We may also repeat this analysis for RNA and crucivirus.
